Clarence J. Sundram, JD, is a nationally recognized expert on conditions in institutions and community programs for persons with mental disabilities. Currently, he serves as the Independent Monitor for the federal court overseeing the implementation of a Settlement Agreement class action which offers approximately 4000 persons with mental illness residing in adult homes in NYC the opportunity to move to supported housing with support services. Mr. Sundram's reports to the Court have influenced numerous refinements in the implementation process including the creation of a peer bridger program to be implemented in 22 impacted adult homes.
In March 2011, Governor Andrew Cuomo asked Mr. Sundram to serve as Special Advisor to the Governor for Vulnerable Persons to help address the issue of abuse and neglect of persons in residential care. The report he made to the Governor in April 2012 "The Measure Of A Society: Protection Of Vulnerable  Persons In Residential Facilities Against Abuse & Neglect" recommended sweeping reforms in the system for prevention, reporting, investigating and responding to such incidents in New York. Governor Cuomo proposed and the legislature unanimously adopted The Protection of People with Special Needs Act, implementing the key recommendations of the report, on June 20, 2012.
He also served a member of the Willowbrook Review Panel monitoring the implementation of the Willowbrook Consent Judgment, and as the Special Master & Court Monitor in class action lawsuits in New York, Washington, DC and Maine involving the rights of persons with mental disabilities under the Constitution, the Americans with Disabilities Act and other laws. He has served as President of the Board of Directors of Disability Rights International, a non-governmental agency which advocates on behalf of persons with mental disabilities worldwide and as a trustee of the van Ameringen Foundation.
For 20 years, he served as the founding Chairman of the New York State Commission on Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled, an independent state oversight agency charged with advising the governor and legislature, investigating deaths, child abuse, patient abuse, and financial fraud and abuse in programs serving persons with mental disabilities. Mr. Sundram has also served as a member of the Board of Directors of the National Association of Protection & Advocacy Systems (now National Disability Rights Network).
Mr. Sundram has participated in international efforts to reform mental health services in Argentina, Armenia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Kosovo, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Romania, Serbia, Turkey, the Russian Federation and Uruguay as a member of the Board of Disability Rights International and as a consultant to UNICEF and WHO.
	He has testified by invitation before both Houses of the US Congress and before legislative committees in New York, Maine, Massachusetts and Washington, DC regarding legislation dealing with abuse, neglect and exploitation. He has published numerous articles in legal and other professional journals, and is a frequent speaker at national conferences. He has appeared on such programs as Nightline, 48 Hours and The CBS Evening News. He has received several awards in recognition of his public service, including legislative resolutions by the New York State Senate and Assembly; Distinguished Public Service Awards from the Nelson A. Rockefeller College of the University of Albany and from the New York State Association of Rehabilitation Facilities, the Dybwad Humanitarian Award from AAIDD, Human Rights Award from the American Psychosocial Rehabilitation Association; the Public Policy Leadership Award from the NYS Association of Psychiatric Rehabilitation Services; a Special Award from the American Association on Mental Retardation "for Courageous Advocacy & Exemplary Leadership," and the Humanitarian Award & a Lifetime Achievement Award from the New York City Chapter of the Association for Retarded Children.


